hello curious my friends I'm dr. Becky
and a welcome to this the very first sky
news for October 2018
[Music]
so in this monthly series I'm gonna be
going over everything exciting to see in
the sky and it's coming months and then
also discussing last month's news and
all things face in astronomy
I've always thought though I just want a
quick thank you to everybody who
subscribed from the past couple weeks
since launching it's great to see
everyone engaging in the comments and
yes mics and lights on the way I promise
I know my camera's not in focus
Brady usually sorts this stuff out that
way it focuses after about three minutes
all right so let's kick things off and
stop by
[Music]
so something nice that easy to start
with tonight or Wednesday the 17th of
October the moon will be on one side of
Mars and then by tomorrow night on the
18th of October at the moon will be on
the other side of Mars to look to the
south night you will see a half moon and
then also Mars next to it Mars will look
like a star but it'll be very red and
very very bright which so you can pick
out and then tomorrow night if you go
round about the same time the moon will
be on the other side of Mars speaking of
the moon no it is also a great time to
look for what's known as the golden
handle on the moon now the best time to
see this golden handle is around about
four to five days before the full moon
so the next full moons October 24th so
probably around about this weekend if
you've got a telescope or small
binoculars break those out and check out
if you can see it right on what we call
the Terminator of the moon so seven
eight on the moon is the edge of where
the sun's light reaches and basically if
you think about at sunset on earth
shadows are so much more elongated at
sunset and Sun rising at the edge of
where the sun's light is reaching on
earth so you get the same thing
happening on the moon you get these
really elongated shadows and so that
shows up a lot of detail on the moon it
throws a lot of things into really sharp
relief so these beautiful ridge of
mountains edge probably a creative long
times millions of years ago you can see
really really well when the terminates
of just cooks across them and it shows
them in such beautiful details it's a
great great great time to spot this
feature living so for those of you who
don't have binoculars or telescopes
though there is another thing that I'd
like you guys to look out for this month
so the constellation of Cygnus will be
right above your head just after it's
gone dark so might only one that people
are familiar with but it's supposed to
look like a swan or a cross in the sky
so it's pretty easy to find and then
once you have found it the cool thing is
that the neck of the Swan on a long bit
of the cross traces the path of the
Milky Way in the sky so once you've
found Cygnus
you know what to look to see the Milky
Way so if you can get somewhere really
really dark this weekend then you should
be able to see that beautiful white
strip of lights of the Milky Way and
running across the sky then I've got
something for all you early
and for you now house so to meet your
showers coming up the Orionids and the
towards for all you early birds you want
to try and catch the Orionid meteor
shower this is going to be like pre-dawn
on the 21st of October there's probably
about like 10 to 20 an hour but if you
are say driving or you're gonna be up
anyway then perhaps you might see a
couple coming always away from the
constellation of Orion for all of you
night owls perhaps working night shifts
you've got the towards meteor shower
that's gonna peak around the 5th and 6th
of December which is great in UK pulling
bonfire night if you up anyway and if
I'm watching the fireworks
keep on looking up at the sky and you
might even get lucky and see some
meteors as well people is really gonna
be about like some 5 to 10 and hours so
not many so you really do have to keep
your eyes peeled
but again they'll be coming from the
constellation of Taurus and so much fun
Taurus you look away from there and now
back to earth what has been happening in
space news this month
[Music]
I think a lot happening in space news
this month oh my gosh we go so much to
get through whoo okay so let's start
with the big headline from last week
which was the Soyuz rocket launch
failure so people might have seen this
on the main news the Soyuz spacecraft
carrying a national and a cosmonaut to
the International Space Station having
rocket booster failure mid launch so the
Soyuz is a Russian rocket and spacecraft
that launches astronauts and cosmonauts
to the International Space Station it's
currently the only thing we have to
service the space station we used to
have the Space Shuttle the USA's NASA
space shuttle that that was retired
about a decade ago the Soyuz dates back
from the 1970s so it's a little bit old
but isn't very reliable tech it's never
had an issue before had minor one in the
70s but otherwise has like a perfect
record of launches so it was weird that
there was an issue last Thursday though
October 11th there was a planned launch
to get us NASA astronaut Nick Hague and
Russian cosmonaut Alexei of chibin up to
the International Space Station
unfortunately mid launch there was a
rocket booster failure what that means
is that the Soyuz spacecraft didn't get
enough boost in order for it to make it
to the International Space Station so
that's what bought mid flight and enter
something that's called ballistic
descent mode which as far as I can tell
just means falling back to earth
[Music]
and people who were following on live it
was pretty scary for a while NASA TV
just cut to the control-room there
wasn't any updates except the fact that
when we heard that the spacecraft had
actually been seen to launch parachutes
and also that the crew and then down
safe on the ground it then took rescue
crews about an hour to 90 minutes to
actually reach the crew but they were in
radio contact the whole time so it was a
relief to know that both national and
the cosmonaut were safe the Soyuz has
now been grounded though while an
investigation takes place as to why this
happened and whether the Soyuz can even
be launched in the future is it reliable
can we look can we still use this thing
and obviously there are still three
astronauts on the International Space
Station still now they are launched on
the Soyuz the good thing about the Soyuz
is that you go up in one spacecraft and
you come down the exact same spacecraft
you basically doclet on the
international space station and it stays
there until you're ready to come home so
they're not exactly trapped there the
issue is whether we can get enough food
and supplies to them I think they have
frequent suppliers now for six months
but they were due to come back in
December now that all relies on whether
the actual investigation into what
happened last week it's finished by then
perhaps they won't allow them to come
down from the space station until they
understand the failure even though the
failure was in the rocket boosters are
not necessarily actual spacecraft that
carries the astronauts those astronauts
come back from the international space
station the instructional space station
could be empty for the first time since
November 2007 18 years we've had people
you know orbiting the Earth constantly
on the ISS and yet we might now not have
anybody now the u.s. is also working on
its own launch capabilities to the ISS
but instead of oversee NASA led projects
like the space shuttle that we were used
to these are all going to be commercial
projects so you've got space X's dragon
that was jus for crude test flights sort
of early next year they said that they
might be able to pull that forward to
the end of this year then he wants a lot
Boeing star liner again that wasn't due
for crude test until middle the end
years of August time perhaps they might
be able to pull that forward so a very
uncertain future for the ISS of the
minute and I really hope that I have
better news for you next month the other
bad news this month is the Hubble Space
Telescope has gone into safe mode so
safe mode basically means that it's not
taking any observations at the minute
it's just sat there biding its time
while the team at NASA and ISA on the
ground figure out what is wrong with it
the issue is with one of its gyroscopes
so all of you might be familiar with
gyroscopes because other people have
them as toys as kids you would spin them
and then it'd be really really difficult
to knock them over because they're very
very stable when they're spinning even
against things like gravity you can spin
them on their side as well and they'll
stay in that very stable spinning state
and gyroscopes are basically used in a
lot of things you've got one of your
mobile phone so you can tell you know
what angle that you're tilting it out
there in a lot of navigation devices and
a lot of space telescopes have them the
reason that space telescopes have them
is because once you're in the vacuum of
space where there's no real up-down
left-right north-south east-west you
need to be able to tell what direction
you're pointing in so a gyroscope allows
you to be extremely stable and also
allow you to keep very stable point is
because the Hubble Space Telescope
standards that patches the sign for
hours at a time so it needs to be able
to stay staring at a single patch of sky
whilst also orbiting around the earth as
well so it's crucial that these
gyroscopes work otherwise it would be
useless for observations so the Hubble
Space Telescope has six gyroscopes now
they are replaced back in 2009 it only
needs three to function but to have
already failed and the one that failed
last week has been acting up for about a
year and showing the same kind of signs
as the two have already failed so it was
kind of expected the other three are
what called enhanced gyroscopes
so they were expected to live a lot
longer anyway they were sort of a
high-tech gyroscope one of those though
has been a little bit problematic for a
while but the other two are working fine
so the folks at Space Telescope Science
Institute in Baltimore that look after
the daily running of Hubble they've put
the tell us
into safe mode for now while they try
and figure out what they're going to do
so they could try and get this
problematic and Hounds gyroscope back
online if they can that's plan a plan B
is that actually Hubble can run in a two
gyroscope mode if it needs to so fingers
crossed because it's not actually own
these things telescope that's had some
issues this week so the Chandra Space
Telescope which is in x-rays as well
that also had a gyroscope problem and
has been put into safe mode while they
try and figure out what's wrong with
that the Kepler spacecraft that's also
how to glitch this making me very
nervous but fingers crossed
everyone's and good vibes up to Hubble
and China and Kepler and hope that they
make it through these butchers okay so
we've talked a lot about our own moon in
this week but what about XO moons so
this was big big news in the Australian
community over the past couple weeks so
people came out from T G and kipping
saying they may have found the first EXO
moon so we have exoplanets those are
planets that are orbiting different
stars in our own galaxy in our own Milky
Way and we've seen star systems before
we've seen stars with you know 3 4 5 6 7
planets going around them just like our
own solar system with eight this is the
first time that we've discovered a moon
around one of those planets so it's been
found around a planet called Kepler one
six two five beat and so the moon has
been dubbed Kepler 162 5b I and so if
the idea of exomoons had been
hypothesized before people have been
saying they should exist why shouldn't
exist we have moons in our own solar
system
maybe we can observe them in various
different ways maybe we can even take a
direct image of them like one of the
first exoplanets was discovered with
direct imaging but also this idea of
transits to detect these things has also
been raised before so a lot of
exoplanets are discovered by transits so
you have a star that's just shining
towards Earth and then you have a planet
that passes in front of it you will get
a dip in the brightness of the star and
you will see that
in a nice little plot way in brightness
of the starboard dip when the planet
goes in front and the brightest the saw
carries on people said if the planet
also has a moon possibly trailing behind
it then you would get like a double dip
you would get a large dip for the planet
and then a small one moon and so this is
what the researchers in this paper
basically went away hunting for now
they've seen some evidence for in the
Kepler data which is the main telescope
that stares or all of these stars
checking their brightnesses but the data
wasn't as precise if they needed it to
be in order to detect this so then they
got follow-up observations with the
Hubble Space Telescope push like break
for Hubble and that allowed them to
actually get a lot more precise data and
see what they thought was this sort of
double dip transit and then they've said
okay well what models can we fit to the
dates that we have and do any of those
models suggest that there is a moon and
yes the best model that the team could
find was one that had an EXO moon in it
as well as an exoplanets and so what if
I was at the planet kepler 165 feet is
about a jupiter-sized planet and going
around it the EXO moon kepler one 6 to 5
bi is about the size of net you so a lot
of the exoplanets that we found are what
are called hot Jupiters or hot Neptune's
and all those are planets that our guess
the size of Jupiter but they're orbiting
around their star at some of the
distance of mercury or Venus so they're
incredibly incredibly hot so just
because we haven't seen it in our own
solar system doesn't mean that this
might not be a common thing what they
concluded was basically that would be
really worthwhile in following up more
Kepler targets like this and perhaps you
might be able to find even more exomoons
so sticking with the theme of moons
because that just seems to be the theme
of this entire video is the moon
exomoons and now the moon moves so again
this is a paper that came out in the
past week this one's by Kamiya
and raymond basically the question
they're asking is is it possible for a
moon to also have a moon so planets go
around stars moons go around planets
what we're trying to moon so they are
voting them as sub moons in the paper
but since it came out there has been
endless discussion on the internet about
what we should actually call them so yes
sub moons blue moons moonlets betta
moons moon ito and
moves just a moon with an extra Oh added
which I love because you know he could
then go okay so mood goes on a mood and
then a moon goes on a moon so they were
investigating whether it would even be
possible for these kind of things to
form would they be gravitationally
stable in these kind of systems so back
in 2008 we found out that Saturn's moon
rare actually also has a ring system
like Saturn so that suggests the
material that you would need to form a
moon around a moon is actually there or
could be there after the formation of
the planet moon system so basically the
authors of the paper wanted to run some
simulations to test whether this was
even possible especially for you know
planets in our own solar system did they
lie in the parameter space that would be
gravitationally stable because if you
think about our own earth moon system
the moon causes tides on the earth just
from its own gravitational pull and that
causes you know the water on the earth
to bulge and then have time to come in
and type them out if you had an extra
object in that system that was also
going around the moon you know you would
get ridiculously high tides when the
moon moon was in between the Earth and
the moon then you would get lower tides
probably when the moon was it between
the Earth and the moon moon this paper
actually found that our own Earth Moon
system could host the sub moon in
certain cases you know something that
would be bigger than about 20 kilometers
across no exactly massive look-alike
asteroid sized but that it would be
stable at a certain distance away from
the moon which is pretty cool so the
paper also found that one of Jupiter's
moons Callisto and two of Saturn's moons
at Titan and eiope TISS could also host
these sub moons so perhaps we should go
looking for them perhaps they are tiny
around these moons so if the papers
found that the moon could host one of
these things why doesn't it and so they
argue in the paper that actually because
our moon and Jupiter and Saturn's moons
don't host these summons obviously
haven't found them that actually gives
us clues to how they were formed so our
best theory of how the moon was formed
is what's called the giant impact
hypothesis so this is the idea that
another planet collided with the very
early
it's just after its formation liquefied
the colliding planet and basically half
of the earth threw out huge amounts of
material into space which eventually
came together and formed the mood it's
possible though that one of these moons
could capture an asteroid and then that
would be how it would gain a moon moon
so we think that Mars is moons are to
catch asteroids there's nothing stopping
you know our own moon doing the same
obviously if they're moving in quite
large speeds they'll pass the moon it
won't have as much of a gravitational
influence on it most the time asteroids
just smash into the moon which is why
it's so cratered so perhaps it's just
not had a chance yet the perfect
conditions in order to capture an
asteroid so it can have a little moon
well once you've figured out moon moons
and possibly even discovered one you
know the next logical step is is that
boon-'boon Meuse
[Music]
so that's it for this month remember
seven good thoughts up to Hubble Chandra
and pepper I will see you next month for
more sky news but until then dr. Becky
over and out